Today's date is December 18th, 1981. This is a
test. Testing.
Testing, testing. This is a test. This is Terry
Anderson. This is interview number two with
General Ludeke. Today's date is Wednesday,
January 27th, 1982. This is tape three.
Last time, this is our second interview with
General Ludeke. Today is the 27th of January,
1982. Last time we were talking about the position
that you had from July 43rd to February 46th, which
is on page four of your . We were talking about the
position of deputy chief of staff for operations,
plans, trainings, intelligent, and
communications. Army Air Force, Southeast Asia
Command, and the China, India, Burma Theater. And
the last thing that you talked about was your views
about Chiang Kai-shek, and we covered that. And I
was wondering about a couple of other people who
are very important. One was Hap Arnold and another
one was Mountbatten, Lord Mountbatten, and I'd
like you to give your views on those two men. Did you
ever meet them? You must have met them. Yes, I did.
General Arnold was Major Arnold when I first met
him and he was in command of March Field,
California. when I went to Marshfield, first out
of flying school, as a cadet.
Everyone at Marshfield was away flying air mail at
that, when I arrived there, so it was a case of going
on to a post and not being able to call on a
commanding officer for nearly four months
because we had to get him home for, and so I met him
when he did, was able to come home. And
served under him in one capacity or another until
1937, and then
By the time I got back from Panama, he was chief of
staff of the Air Force, Army Air Forces. And
after I got out of the intelligence command, which
was under Army, and joined back with the Air Force,
well then I was under him again, but I joined back
with the Air Force in order to go to India. This was
just prior to Admiral Mountbatten's arrival in
India to take over as Viceroy as well as Commander,
Southeast Asia Command.
So, and I went there at that time to be Chief of Staff
Operations for U.S. Air Forces, CBR, in New Delhi
and attended many of the conferences
in planning and operations
of the Southeast Asia Command under Mountbatten.
And I got to know him very well in that capacity.
Later we went to Cairo to the Sexton Conference and
this was his first major command conference after
having taken over as Supreme Commander Southeast
Asia Command. And in Cairo I served him among
others as an air planner. for many of the
presentations and papers that were presented at,
at the Sexton, uh, conference. It was a very
interesting conference in many respects, but in
our limited area
that was present at the conference, uh, Admiral
Mountbatten, the new Supreme Commander,
uh, Chiang Kai-shek, who I think expected to be the
Southeast Asia commander, and Madame Chang, of
course, was with him. General Joe Stilwell, who
was the senior American commander in India. Sir
Oliver Leese, who was the senior British
commander in India.
All vying for the limited resources that the
combined chiefs of staff might be able to make
available for that theater. So it was a very
interesting time.
Back in India, after Cairo, when we returned, all
of the air forces in India, American, British,
Canadian, Australian, one New Zealand squadron,
Indian, were all integrated into one operational
force called the Southeast Asia Air Command.
General Stratmire was made commander of that
Southeast Asia Air Command,
and I retained my job as deputy chief of staff
operations, plans, training, and intelligence
for that new command. And so we operated all of the
air forces in India through that mechanism out of
General Stratmire's headquarters and all of the
operational things out of my office. This
included not only all of the tactical and
defensive air and offensive bombardment air and
all, but air transport as well. And in that theater
during the war, air transport was probably the
most important single element of a military
capability in the whole pit.
at least it was the most controversial because
everybody wanted it. One incident concerning
Mountbatten,
it's worth recording I think and at least in my
notes.
The Japanese at one point had penetrated India to
the point of surrounding which was a British major
base and outpost on the border between Burma and
India,
and had held it during the worst part of the monsoon
season.
We, the Air Forces, had to go in and fly out nearly
half a million civilians
and fly in food for everybody, including one corps
of British troops who stayed inside. And, of
course, it became a little urgent that somebody
get moving to get that situation changed. Well, in
an area where the rainfall is 300 inches a year,
it's a little bit difficult.
And all of the support that they got had to come by
air, and very limited air that we had available.
In any situation where ground personnel have to be
supplied by air,
you can almost write the conversations before the
operations start. Because the man on the ground
just doesn't have anything like what he needs to do
his job. The man on the air side of that picture
knows he has delivered to him ten times what he
needs to do any job that might be presented to him.
And so there's never a give. That situation just
remains the same. The British troops we thought
were so spoiled that they wouldn't carry their
four o'clock tea.
They would have us drop it at three-thirty,
wherever they happened to be, which was true in
many circumstances, although not all of them, and
I certainly don't mean anything derogatory about
the British troops, but they get spoiled,
everybody gets spoiled. the commander up at
Imphal, a corps commander, a major general in the
British Army, was trying to get his corps ready to
jump off from Imphal and push the Japanese back
across the Irrawaddy River and start moving down
through Vermont.
But it didn't seem that he could ever get the
weather, the supply situation, and everything
else in a situation, in a condition that he felt
more to push it off. Well, Mountbatten got a little
upset about this. Finally flew out of his
headquarters down in Salon and went straight into
M-Fall on his airplane. see what was the matter.
And he was told while he was there that the
air supply just hadn't been built up enough that he
could afford to move, and he'd just have to wait
until we could build up the air supply a little bit
more. Well, Mountbatten kind of hit the ceiling,
what the hell's the matter with those air people
because that wasn't the kind of story he was
getting from them. So he got in his airplane and
took off for Calcutta where we were and where the
headquarters of the ground forces were also.
Sent word to General Stratmire's headquarters
that he wanted Strat over there at Barracore when
he landed. He wanted to talk to him. And
General Stratton called me on the intercom and
told me to get my figures together on whatever I
thought might be subject to the conversation and
let's go. So I did, and I also got my supply man, a
Brigadier Bastien, who was a British brigadier
general.
And we crawled in the boat and went across the Hooli
over to Bearport. But the Admiral had already
landed and was there ahead of us. So as we came into
the Sir Oliver Lee's office area, big, pretty good
sized building in there,
the Admiral came out and met General Stratton, or
met all of us, but General Stratton was leading us,
coming down the hall, and he had his finger, you
know, tell him something, you see. And General
Stratton's a funny kind of a man, a real fine
gentleman that certain things he doesn't, he
draws a line on. He reached out and caught the
Admiral's finger right there.
And he said, I might just bite that thing off.
And the admiral, of course, was most embarrassed
and most apologetic and everything else, but he
just got away from it and do it. Well, we went on in
and the officers sat down and the admiral told us
what his problem was and he wanted to get going and
he didn't seem to be able to get the air supply and
the other things to match up.
I reminded the Admiral that we had sent him a wire
yesterday laying out what the situation was, and
it hadn't changed. And as far as we knew, they were
ready to go, and we didn't know what else they
needed. I said, by the way, would you like to know
what our last two airplane loads were this
morning? He said, yes, I would. I said, remember,
they're outdoor toilet seats. and he looked as
though he thought that was absolutely
incredible,
and relaxed a minute and said, until he used to get
General so-and-so, I've forgotten his name, up on
the phone,
which he did. The Admiral told him if he wasn't
across that chimney by four o'clock the next
morning, he would have to look up to a lance
corporal.
Look up to a lance corporal. Lance corporal,
yeah. Well, we got things all straightened out and
started to leave and went outside and I knew some of
the, a lot of the British officers that was there.
One of them was outside, he wasn't privileged to be
in with all them. And he said, what's he had a mouth
power in that? I said, well he was talking to Donald
so-and-so up at Imphal. He said, well why the hell
doesn't he use the phone?
No,
but I thought that was a wonderful man,
and a very dedicated and understanding man. He had
a hard road to hold.
Prime Minister Churchill was looking right down
his throat on everything.
So he had some real problems, but I thought he was a
wonderful man and did a wonderful job. Did that
major general move out that next morning? Yes, he
did. He didn't have any problems either. He didn't
have any problems with his toilet seats? No, he
didn't.
We followed with air support, and the weather was
reasonable enough that we could do it. And what we
found was that the Japanese had occupied Dakang
and then they'd been cut off from their supplies
and they were damn near starved to death and it was
just a riot. Just routed them out and there was not
really no fight to it at all because they weren't in
a position to hold anything. They were just
hungry.
Which leads you to all kinds of other things. Why
the hell didn't we know that? How come we fed all
those millions or hundreds of thousands of people
out there all that time when we didn't need to, and a
lot of other things, but you can't answer those
questions in retrospect.
Not this far, indeed. I was wondering about
another thing. Generally, how would you describe
Anglo-American relations? in your theater? In
the theater, in India, Anglo-American relations
were not good.
I'm talking about between military people. I'm
not mixing in the civilians and the Indians and all
that sort of thing. I'm talking about— Why were
they not good? They were not good because General
Joe Stilwell
did not get along with any of the British people
that he had to work with there. And their
objectives were not the same.
If one said, who's right, or
whatnot, you'd have to say, well, hell, they
obviously were both wrong, which they were. The
British, I must say, were not a damn bit bashful
about using American things or using us in any way
they could. For example? For example, reversal
and lease. They would ride our airplanes any time
they got their thumb work. I never said a word, but
if we wanted to ride one of their airplanes, We got a
pass onto that airplane, and it got charged back
through the channels. And their government
collected for air travel.
But they had no mechanism whereby we could do this.
That's just one little example. And there are
thousands of others. And of course, the dam's not
bigger than that. And people didn't like that
attitude.
And there were a lot of things about us that they
didn't like. Uncle Joe Stilwell wanted to go into
Burma and kick the Japs out of there. Well, from the
British point of view, there were a hell of a lot of
things a lot more important than that. And a hell of
a lot higher priority than that over there. So they
didn't agree. And Chiang Kai-shek, of course,
didn't like the British. and their objectives
were not the same as his by any means.
Stillwell was also his ground force commander in
Chiang.
So that accentuated the problem, rubbed it in a
bit.
In retrospect, we had some people in China People
in the press and people in the diplomatic service
who are sympathetic to the communists and were
taking advantage of that time to help them out.
No one could see this plainly and say this is the
case, but it caused one awful lot of disruption
over there, even in the middle of the fighting.
Could you give me an example of that? Well, yes. You
remember the problems General Hurley had when he
came over there as ambassador to China. I was in
trouble with Davies and with Stewart, whether.
And
it was very, very disruptive.
So you had mixed up in any of those things with
Colonel Hurley in Chungking and the embassy and
Stilwell commanding ground forces in Vermont and
China and American ground forces in India.
Chenault was in control of all the air forces that
Chiang had and had to be helping what
we did and what the British did. Then
we go over and integrate all those forces into a
British command, even though it was under
American actual command. still answered to a
British man. And it made things hard to keep the
wheels turning. Sure, it was towns. And that's
where I spent my hours around the clock. My office
hours ran from seven in the morning until two in the
morning usually.
I had the best bunch of people I've ever had
anywhere. Under your command? In my staff. I
didn't have a command. Yeah, in your staff. In my
staff. What rank were you when you left? When I went
to India in 43, I was a brand new colonel. In August
of 44, I was promoted to Brigadier General, so I was
a general officer the rest of the time. Brigadier
General the rest of the time I was there.
Okay, now getting back to, I want to talk about the
generalship later, but getting back to Asia, it's
your contention then that the communists in Asia
during the war were disrupting the situation and
making relations between the allies even worse.
Well, not so much the communists. Well, yes,
that's true, although that was not the major thing
that I was referring to in that at all. Mao Zedong
and his communists and whatnot had pulled back and
were consolidating and building their own
strength. And of course they were fighting the
Japanese too. Sure they were, yeah. They had
nothing to gain from the Japanese. They allegedly
were helping us and they did help a little bit. They
let us put in a weather service up through
that area. They were looking for— Did you ever
visit that Weather Service? Well, yes, I operated
it, but—and I went up there, I think, twice. Did you
ever meet any of those people? Oh, yeah. Did you
ever—who did you meet? Well, Charles— Charles
Lyme? Yeah, and Mao. You did? Yeah, and— Gee, I
didn't know them. I didn't have a great deal to do
with them, but I did meet them. Well, tell me about
those meetings. Well, one went up there to try to
put in, to say a weather service is stretching the
point a little bit. What we tried to do was to
indoctrinate
about 30 Chinese people in how to read some crude
instruments that we give them to give wind
direction and velocity and temperature and
humidity. And to get that to another one of their
people who could get it to the radio station so it
could be sent out and we could pick it up. I'm trying
to think of the name of the man who built all these
things.
Very famous guy, makes me mad. I don't remember,
and I'll have to get that name for you.
He made the anemometers out of spoons and
thermometers out of alcohol and straws and eggs
with the centers taken out. These kind of things
that give them a way to do it. Spillhouse.
Spillhouse?
Yeah. Who later became dean of science at the
University of Minnesota? That's right. Sure. I
know him personally, but we've interviewed him as
a matter of fact. I know him very well personally.
I've met a lot of them. A lot of times, a lot of nights
with him then and since then. He's an interesting
character. He was a consultant to me out at the Jet
Propulsion Lab as a matter of fact. And so the one
time that I went up there and I talked with Mao about
what it was we were trying to do and how we wanted to
talk to some of the people to get it lined up.
So Spillhouse and a couple of the others did most of
the talking with those people. They were up there
for a couple of weeks, two or three times. I was only
up there for that one day, one visit. Then after the
war ended, it was after the Japanese through
Natal, but prior to September 2nd formal
training,
Mao and Chao
and three of the others, and I've forgotten who
they were, came down to Chongqing at the American
ambassador's request, and I've forgotten now
whether that was General
Hurley or the man who followed him, one or the
other. Anyway, they came down there and they
landed at Chongqing in a DC-3, which was about the
biggest airplane you could get into Chongqing.
And I had been to India and had come back to
Chongqing, except I landed at a military base
about 20 miles out and drove in. And I drove in to the
Chongqing airport. in time to join the group that
went to meet them, which was a delegation from the
embassy. I mean, the American ambassador
wouldn't go out there to meet this particular
group, so he sent somebody. And I just joined them,
went out and talked with them there for a while. And
then I went to, and I talked with Chang while they
were there about some aspects of their visit.
And I never did, I didn't see any more of them. I had
no further contact with either one of them. Now,
they were up in, wasn't it, Yunnan Province? Yes.
During the war, what were their living conditions
like up there? Well, they were damn primitive.
That's what I thought. Very, very primitive, and
almost on a starvation situation. But so was
everything else in China almost. It wasn't
comparatively so terribly bad.
How did they treat you when they went up to Yunnan?
Oh, very nice. They had nothing to lose from the
things they did with me. I stationed a man up there
and left him up there at the headquarters. He
stayed up there I don't know, three or four months.
And collected this weapon, got it out, and he ran—
Was he American? Yes, he was the U.S. Air Force
officer. And he ran some,
handled some missions out of there, some fighter
missions against the Japanese.
And they just didn't bother him either way. I mean,
the communists didn't. I'm sure they watched down
carefully what he did, but they didn't try to
interfere in any way. Were they cordial to you, or
suspicious? Do you remember what they said? Well,
they were real cordial and all, and they of course
didn't act suspicious, but they were looking at
the long range thing. There wasn't anything in the
short range that they were worried about. We
weren't going to attack them. China didn't have
the capacity to attack them. Both of us were
fighting the Japanese. weren't anything to be
worrying about. They could just sit and try to
consolidate themselves as well as they could and
get past the present crisis and try to survive,
which they did very well, you see, because when the
war ended and as a result of lack of agreement at
that particular conference, a decision was made
to move several of Chiang's divisions from the
south, and even from Burma, up into the area of
Pekin, Tencent, and all in order to hold it from the
Communists. And we did move by air at the end of that
pipeline starting way back in India, which made it
one hell of a job. And we got them in place, and they
consolidated their position, and we're in firm
control of Pekin, Tencent, and the whole northern
area. But things turned sour back here in the U.S.,
and the China lobby, and all of the trouble in the
State Department, and everything else. So the
ships that were supposed to supply those
nationalist Chinese that we moved in never did get
there.
And the troops sat there, out of ammunition, out of
food, and eventually were taken over by the
Communists. General Marshall went there with his
mission, if you remember, to try to ameliorate
that situation.
And he probably did for a couple of weeks or so, but
in the long run went on to the communists and the
nationalist divisions were holding home and
whatever material they had went to help the Maoist
forces. Were the British and the Americans back in
India with your post, were any of the British and
Americans worried during the war, 1944 and 1945,
about the possibility of communism in Southeast
Asia or in China itself? Both of us were, very much.
Do you remember any examples, any specifics?
Well, I remember, of course, a lot of specific
conversations about it, but in terms of actions
that
would have anything to do with the course of the
war, no. Because, you see, Russia was not active
over there in that theater at all. and the Chinese
communists then were the only communist forces
that had to reckon with and they were isolated and
didn't have a damn thing to fight with and weren't
trying to get in a battle anyhow. So militarily
there was very little that happened over there
that had any impact either way. seeing the writing
on the wall a long ways off, lots of us didn't like
it. And in retrospect, you can certainly see
what was being planned if you read Teddy White's
book, Thunder Out of China, and several others
that have written since then. And that was being
planned right there at that time. Teddy White and
that woman that worked with him, Annalee Jacoby.
Hell, they were in our headquarters half of the
damn time. No kidding. Trying to ride our
airplanes everywhere one would go. One or the
other would be there trying to be on it to go.
Again, they weren't there acting as communists.
They just wanted to get the story? They, well, it
was a little more than that. They wanted to get a
story all right, but their mind was pretty well
made up, and it's like a lot of the people that
you've seen since that time, who, they don't want
to say they're communists or anything, but they
don't miss a single opportunity to degrade
anything that's U.S., anything that's American,
to make a damn how good it is, why it's bad, there's
something wrong with it. same thing in the
communist side of the house, it's either never
mentioned or it's praised in an entirely
different light. And that was kind of the way with
Teddy and with Jacoby and Davies and Davies' wife
and Stuart,
although I really shouldn't be getting on record
about those particular things, Stuart and
Davies, because that's that had its airing in
proper form, decisions were made. Now as far as
joint planning, joint planning seems to me, from
what you've said, to be pretty close between the
British and the Americans at the Southeast Asia
Air Command.
Did that come to an end immediately after Japan
surrendered, or how long did it take for that
planning to collapse? I mean obviously there's no
need for it, the war is over, but I mean as far as
post-war planning or anything like that. Was
there a switch then? Well,
yes and no. It was strictly joint military
planning at our level, at a theater level. There
was really not much to do except How did we
disengage and get our people and our materials out
and take care of accountability for them?
Decisions had to be made of whether you were going
to let the British have all these on Lind's lease,
whether you were going to destroy them, or whether
you were going to try to ship them back to the United
States or ship them somewhere else, Japan for
example. And so there was a great deal of joint
planning went on in that line under, with directed
objectives. It wasn't a question of deciding
what's best for, at my level of course, it had been
at some other level. That having been done,
then there's really not much left for a theater
level to do.
We had already moved long before this to China, and
as
of the time the Japanese surrendered, I was in
Chongqing, and in October I had already moved to
Shanghai,
and Southeast Asia Command, that is Southeast
Asia Air Command, no longer existed even then.
And so the joint planning at theater level
disappeared
just as fast as we could dispose of the problems we
faced as a result of the end of the war. We didn't do
any forward planning as to what we would do in the
theater because everything that was on an
American mind was get out of here and get home.
Sure, demobilization. Not only there, but here
also. It was the same thing on their mind. I stayed
longer in order to consolidate an awful lot of
records that were over there and then to go to Japan
and present
the Air Force operations in India and China. to the
U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey, that group that—
Sure, wrote all the reports. Wrote all those
reports. Paul Nitsche was the deputy of that at
that time. I met Paul in Tokyo at that
presentation. I've known him ever since. I don't
envy him his job up to this morning by a damn sight.
No. Trying to clean up after Haig and Gromyko left
last night over in Geneva.
I was wondering about Ambassador Patrick Early.
There have been a lot of accounts of course written
about those years in the mid and late 40s in China in
our role, and some historians and journalists
have reported that Hurley was not the most capable
man in dealing with that role, and I was wondering
what your response to that is.
I guess I might be a little prejudiced. I don't
know. You know, General Hurley was a good many
things before he became Ambassador to China. And
he was, in addition to anything else he might have
been, he was a good politician.
I'm not sure I know all the things that go into a good
politician.
And my relationship
with General Hurley was such that I didn't have an
opportunity to make the kind of judgments that
that are being called for by these people. I have a
notion that a good many of them had even less of an
opportunity, but they made the judgment anyway.
My contact with him, well I had met him two or three
times here in the United States when he was
Secretary of War or something else, but he
wouldn't have remembered my name even. when I went
to India, he was already in China for the Sexton
Conference.
He was going to go to the conference from
Chongqing.
And General Stratton and I were going from New
Delhi, India.
So, General Hurley thumbed a ride over the hump,
which was the only way he could get there to New
Delhi, and then went with us from New Delhi to
Cairo, and spent the time with us in Cairo until he
went home with Chang and Madame Chang. Oh, I don't
know, after four or five days, whereas I stayed on
two or three weeks and worked on other things. But
Donald Stratenbauer's airplane was a B-24,
combat B-24. It had two niceties in it. Under the
top gun turret there was a bench that you could sit
on, and in the back where the side gun turrets were,
we had cleaned out some of the communications
equipment and put two narrow bunks down there.
Otherwise it was a combat B-24 with a combat crew
and armed and gunned and everything else.
On the way to Cairo, Della Hurley and I rode in the
belly on these two little bunks that we had put on.
And it's quite a long way from New Delhi to Cairo. It
sure is. So we had quite a bit of time to talk, and we
did. in spite of the roar and four engines, and tend
to be quite loud talk. I found him to be a really
delightful person, a real fine sense of humor, and
a wide, wide knowledge of, in some cases, detailed
knowledge of a wide range of subjects, and an
acquaintance with people that I just couldn't
believe. I mean, he just knew everybody. And every
one of them. By the time we got to Cairo, I had a very
great respect for him.
I didn't get to see very much of him after we got
back. Well, of course, he was in Chongqing, and I
was in New Delhi, and that's further apart from San
Francisco and New York. Well, it's about as far
apart. In that time, it was no way to get there.
So I saw him four or five times up there and talked
with him. But I didn't get to know him as associated
with the decisions that were being currently
made. Obviously, it was a hell of a lot of fire where
he was pointing the smoke. And when you have
someone in your own organization who is
undercutting you, particularly your number two
man, going to be problems. I don't care what the job
is or what the organization is." And so he had a real
ugly one there.
And I guess for my money he handled it just about as
well as you could, considering the support that he
didn't get from the States. I think back here in
Washington, If you look back now at what happened
shortly after that, you could say that
one espousing the ideas that General Hurley had
would
be undercut on every side in Washington. the same
as I mentioned a minute ago, when Chiang
Kai-shek's troops, having been moved into
position, were allowed to sit there and starve to
death and didn't get support. We wouldn't have
moved them in if we hadn't provided for the support
in advance, but it didn't make it. And I'm not sure
where it went, but...
I think it was deep-sixed. So you blame the Truman
administration now? Well, I hate to say
administration. I really blame the China lobby in
the Congress.